The proposed course aims at explaining the nature of the subject. It throws light on the importance of geography and describes the nature of geography as a subject. It attempts to enrich knowledge and illustrate basic concepts as well as technical terms which are building blocks of geographic knowledge. Effort, however, has been made to develop the concepts in a graded and sequential manner and deepen the interest in the subject. Geography is one of the oldest earth sciences, and its roots date back to the works of the early Greek scholars. The word ‘geography’ was first used by the Greek scholar Eratosthenes in the third century B.C. "Geo" means “Earth” and "Graphy" means “to describe”; the literal meaning of geography is to describe the earth’s surfaces. In other words, geography is largely the study of the interaction of all physical and human phenomena and landscapes created by such interactions. It is about how, why, and where human and natural activities occur and how these activities are interconnected. Geography has undergone changes in its approach. The earlier geographers were descriptive geographers. Later, geography came to be developed as an analytical science. Today, the discipline is not only concerned with descriptions but also with analysis as well as prediction.
In this lesson, you will learn how important geography is in everyday life. This study will encourage you to understand your own place and spaces with greater interest. After studying this lesson, you will be able to appreciate the use of geography in daily life, trace the development of geography as a discipline, understand man-environment relationships and their impacts on each other, illustrate the systematic and regional approaches of geography, understand various analytical techniques in geography, and identify the different branches of geography and its scope. You must have noticed that the earth’s surface is ever-changing. In general, the natural phenomena like mountains, rivers, lakes, etc., change slowly, while the cultural elements like buildings, roads, crops, change fast. Travelling from one place to another, you notice that the number and types of trees change from area to area. All this is because of the continuous interaction between the environment in which we live and the way we use it. The study of geography is about observing such patterns.
Another aspect of geography is to understand the factors or reasons behind areal differentiation—how social, cultural, economic, and demographic factors change our physical landscape and create new or altered landscapes by human interventions. For example, human settlements are transformations of forest or barren lands for living purposes by human beings. Geography is often thought of as the art of making and studying maps. Maps give us a much more correct and graphic view of the way the Earth’s surface looks compared to a picture or drawing. As earlier, even today, geographical information about an area is available through reports, travel diaries, and gazetteers. At present, maps can be drawn by using satellite images and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) tools. Computers easily convert the information from satellite images into maps to show what changes development can bring about. Such information is of benefit to society. Such mapmakers are in great demand today. Nowadays, geographers, engineers, environmental scientists, city planners, social scientists, and many others learn to use GIS to understand the Earth better.
Geography not only investigates what is where on the Earth but also why it is there. Geographers study the location of activities, carefully identify patterns using maps, and find out the reasons for these patterns. The areas are then described based on the distribution of landforms, population, house types, and agriculture. They discover the linkages and movements between places and are able to infer the spatial processes that are working in an area. Today, all over the world, there are problems related to providing food security, health, effective energy use, and environmental conservation. Equally important are equality issues and sustainable development. All these can be achieved by using our resources in sustainable ways. The study of geography is, therefore, necessary to learn more about environmental processes and to understand how land use planning can help us to overcome problems.
Geography is a science of space. Maps are an essential tool of geographers. Digital Geographical Information System is a new tool for making maps. Spatial planning can be done using both maps and the study of geography. Geography has been defined differently through different periods of its history. Geographical work in ancient Greece had followed two distinct traditions. One was the mathematical tradition, which was focused on fixing the location of places on the earth’s surface, and the other was gathering geographic information through travels and fieldwork. According to them, the purpose of geography was to provide a description of the physical features and conditions in different parts of the world. The emergence of the regional approach in geography also emphasized the descriptive character of geography. According to Humboldt, geography is the science related to nature, and it studies and describes all material things found on Earth. Another important school of thought defined geography as the study of man-environment relationships. Geography as a study of the earth’s surface and as the study of man-environment relationships. The earliest records illustrate the interests of scholars in understanding the physical domain of the earth by making maps and astronomical measurements.
The Greeks are given the credit of being the earliest geographers, prominent among them being Homer, Herodotus, Thales, Aristotle, and Eratosthenes. This period, starting from the middle of the 15th century and continuing into the early 18th century, provides us with enormous information about the physical and cultural nature of the world by the travels and explorations of early geographers. The early seventeenth century witnessed the beginnings of a new scientific geography. Christopher Columbus, Vasco de Gama, Ferdinand Magellan, and Thomas Cook were important explorers and travelers among those. Varenius, Kant, Humboldt, and Ritter led the geographers of this period. They contributed to the development of cartography, discovering new lands, and developing geography into a scientific discipline. Ritter and Humboldt are frequently referred to as the founders of modern geography. Generally, the latter half of the nineteenth century is considered a period of modern geography. The first modern geographer, in the true sense, was Ratzel, who built the structure of modern geography on the foundations laid down by classical geographers.
The development of geography during the post-Second World War period has been very rapid. The American and European geographers, such as Hartshorne, have contributed the maximum during this phase. Hartshorne described geography as a science dealing with areal differentiation. The present-day geographers look upon the regional approach and systematic approach as complementary rather than contradictory. Geography has now acquired the status of a science that explains the arrangements of various natural and cultural features on the earth’s surface. Geography is a holistic and interdisciplinary field of study engaged in understanding the changing spatial structure from past to the future. Thus, the scope of geography is in various disciplines, like armed services, environment management, water resources, disaster management, meteorology, and planning, and various social sciences. Apart from that, a geographer can help in day-to-day life like tourism, commuting, housing, and health-related activities. Today, geography is the only discipline that brings all natural and human sciences on a common platform to understand the dynamics of the spatial configuration of the earth’s surface.
There are two main approaches in geography: a study of specific natural or human phenomena that gives rise to certain spatial patterns and structures on the earth’s surface is called systematic study. It deals with earth systems like the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the lithosphere, and the biosphere, which encompass all of Earth’s living organisms. It focuses on various kinds of forests, grasslands, distribution of flora and fauna, human-nature relationships, and the quality of the living environment and its implications for human welfare. It describes culture, populations, dynamics of social, economic, and political aspects of space. It deals with methods and techniques for field studies, qualitative and quantitative cartographic analysis, Geographic Information System, Global Positioning System, and remote sensing. Geography has developed in four periods: ancient period, pre-modern period, modern period, and recent. The contribution of Hartshorne is pioneering in the field of geography in the recent period. Geography is a holistic and interdisciplinary field of study engaged in understanding the changing spatial structure at different territorial levels.
Unlike systematic geography, regional geography starts with the spatial imprints of one or all the systematic geographic processes discernible as regions of different sizes. Regions could be based on a single factor like relief, rainfall, vegetation, per capita income. They could also be multi-factor regions formed by the association of two or more factors. Administrative units like states, districts, and tehsils can also be treated as regions. The main sub-branches of regional geography are two main approaches in geography, i.e., systematic and regional. Systematic geography is divided into four branches. Regional geography also has four branches. Geographical thinking and concepts affect our daily decisions in a number of ways. For example, when urban master plans are made or rural development strategies are considered, it is important to understand the physical structure, climatic conditions, and availability of resources in an area. The decision to shift industries from city areas would require the extension of industrial land use into farming areas. This would displace farmers and their source of income. Similarly, the construction of a railway line or highway causes ribbon development. Many economic activities concentrate along such corridors. Nowadays, with the need to provide relief material to all affected persons after a flood or an earthquake, a good understanding of the geography of the area is required. Distribution of relief is functional and related to the needs of people, according to climate or terrain.
Cartography is concerned with the preparation of maps and diagrams to show the distribution of geographical phenomena. Important methods in geography are deductive and inductive in nature. Various statistical techniques and models are used for regional analysis and to understand spatial distribution and interaction. Most of us are fascinated with maps. "Cartography" is the study and practice of making maps and diagrams. It represents the earth with maps and abstract symbols. Maps have traditionally been made using pen, ink, and paper, but computers have revolutionized cartography. With GIS methods, one can prepare maps and diagrams with greater choice and efficiency. Spatial data is obtained from measurement and other published sources and can be stored in a database, from which it can be extracted for a variety of purposes. Current trends in this field are moving away from drawing with ink or paper-type methods of map-making towards the creation of increasingly dynamic, interactive maps that can be manipulated digitally. Most commercial-quality maps are now made with map-making software. Computer-aided data management, Geographic Information Systems, and Global Positioning Systems. Cartography has grown from a collection of drafting techniques into an actual science. Cartographers must understand which symbols convey information about the Earth most effectively and make such maps that will encourage everyone to use the maps to find places or use them for their daily work. A cartographer must learn geodesy and fairly advanced mathematics to understand how the shape of the Earth affects the distortion of map symbols projected onto a flat surface for viewing.
"Geographic Information Systems" deals with the storage of information about the Earth for automatic retrieval by a computer in an accurate manner. In addition to other sub-disciplines of geography, GIS specialists must understand computer science and database systems. Maps have traditionally been used to explore the Earth and to exploit its resources. GIS technology, as an expansion of cartographic science, has enhanced the efficiency and analytic power of traditional mapping. Now, as the scientific community recognizes the environmental consequences of human activities, GIS technology is becoming an essential tool in the effort to understand the process of global change. Various map and satellite information sources can combine in ways that recreate the interactions of complex natural systems. Such visualization can help to predict what will happen to an area if it is repeatedly flooded or what changes are expected if a particular industry is located or developed in an area. Ordinance Survey, the NATMO, is a premier organization for mapping in India. Its maps of the one-million series are well known. The organization of the Cartographic Unit in the 1960s at the French Institute, Pondicherry, brought a significant impact on the development of geography in India. Its publication of Vegetation and Soil maps at the scale of 1:100,000 was very well received for their cartographic appreciation and resource mapping. This Unit was upgraded in 1995 as a Geomatics Laboratory with an emphasis on computer cartography and GIS.
These aspects of geographical techniques deal with numerical methods most commonly found in geography. In addition to spatial analysis, you are likely to find methods like cluster analysis and discriminant analysis in geographic studies. These statistical techniques are introduced to you in later chapters. When you undertake the local area study, you yourself will see how useful these methods are in finding patterns and identifying relationships between space and the activities that are performed in them. In the 1950s, the regional science movement arose, led by Walter Isard. This provided a more quantitative and analytical base to geographical questions, in contrast to the more qualitative tendencies of traditional geography. Regional Science comprises the body of knowledge in which regional economics, resource management, location theory, urban and regional planning, transportation and communication, human geography, population distribution, landscape ecology, and environmental quality are examined for regional development. Variable phenomena on the earth’s surface can be treated separately or in association.