The earth is the only known planet with developed life in the universe. Like most celestial bodies, the earth is spherical in shape. You also know that hot water and molten lava eject out from the earth’s interior, indicating that the temperature below the earth’s surface is very high. The world’s deepest mining is limited only to a depth of less than 5 kilometers. As we know, the land features seldom retain any fixed form, and their shape is constantly changing. One group of exogenetic forces includes those which weaken and disintegrate the rocks at their original location. The second group consists of endogenetic forces which remove the disintegrated rocks from high lands and deposit them in the lowlands. These two processes have been responsible for disintegrating rocks and shaping new landforms. They are also partly responsible for the formation of soil, which is very important for us.
In this lesson, we will study the earth’s interior and the materials that form the upper portion of the earth’s crust. You will also learn about weathering and its types, the process of gradation, and the significance and formation of soils. After studying this lesson, you will be able to explain the limitations of direct observations of the earth’s interior, compare the different layers of the earth’s interior with reference to thickness, temperature, density, and pressure, classify rocks according to their mode of formation, describe the economic significance of rocks, explain the term weathering and describe its types with suitable examples, explain the various gradational processes changing the face of the land, differentiate between degradation and aggradation, relate weathering with soil formation, and explain the various factors contributing to soil formation.
It is not possible to know about the earth’s interior by direct observations because of its huge size and the changing nature of its internal composition. Through mining and drilling operations, we have been able to observe the earth’s interior directly only up to a depth of a few kilometers. The rapid increase in temperature below the earth’s surface is mainly responsible for setting a limit to direct observation inside the earth. The temperature in the earth’s interior is so high that it can even melt any tool used for drilling. This fact also restricts deep drilling, thus causing hindrance to direct observation of the materials of the earth’s interior. The huge size of the earth and increasing temperature with depth have set a limit to direct observation of the earth’s interior.
The above diagram shows the concentric layers of the earth’s interior. The innermost layer surrounding the earth's center is called the core. The core is the densest layer of the earth, with its density ranging from 9.5 to 14.5 and sometimes even higher. It is composed mainly of iron and nickel, thus commonly known as Nife (Nickel + Ferrum). The core consists of two sub-layers: the inner one is solid, and the outer one is semi-liquid. The layer surrounding the core is known as the mantle. Major constituent elements of the mantle are magnesium and silicon; hence, this layer is termed Sima (Silica + Magnesium). The density of this layer varies from 3.3 to 5.7. The mantle is surrounded by the outermost layer of the earth, known as the lithosphere, whose density varies from 2.70 to 2.95. Major constituent elements of the lithosphere are silica (Si) and aluminum (Al), thus this layer is termed Sial (Silica + Aluminum). The outermost part of the lithosphere is known as the crust. The core, mantle, and crust are the three main concentric layers of the earth's interior. The core is the innermost layer and has the highest density. It is made up mainly of nickel and iron. The mantle is the layer lying between the core and lithosphere, and its major constituents are silicon and magnesium. The crust is the outermost layer of the earth and is mainly composed of silicon and aluminum.
Temperature, pressure, and density increase from the earth’s surface to its center. The temperature at the center is estimated to lie somewhere between 3000°C and 5000°C. Such high temperatures inside the earth may be due to chemical reactions under high-pressure conditions and the disintegration of radioactive elements. The pressure also increases from the surface towards the center of the earth due to the huge weight of the overlying rocks. Therefore, in deeper portions, the pressure is tremendously high. The pressure near the center is considered to be 3 to 4 million times the pressure of the atmosphere at sea level. Due to the increase in pressure and the presence of heavier materials towards the earth’s center, the density of the earth’s layers also increases. The materials of the innermost part of the earth are very dense, as already stated.
The outermost part of the lithosphere is called the crust. This is the most significant part of the earth because it is occupied by humans. The material of the crust is made up of rocks. Rocks are of different types—some are hard like granite, soft like clay, and loose like gravel. Rocks have a great variety of color, weight, and hardness. Rocks are composed of minerals, which are aggregates or physical mixtures of one or more minerals. Minerals, on the other hand, are made up of two or more elements in a definite ratio and have a definite chemical composition. The crust is made up of more than 2000 minerals, but out of these, six are the most abundant and contribute the maximum to this uppermost part of the earth. These are feldspar, quartz, pyroxenes, amphiboles, mica, and olivine. Granite is a rock whose constituent minerals bound together are quartz, feldspar, and mica, which make it a hard rock. Change in the ratio of these minerals gives rise to granites of different colors and hardness. The minerals containing metals are called metallic minerals. Hematite, a major iron ore, is a metallic mineral. Ores are metallic minerals that can be profitably mined. Rocks are of immense economic importance to us.
On the basis of their mode of formation, rocks may be grouped into three types: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic. The word igneous is derived from the Latin word ‘ignis,’ meaning fire. Igneous rocks are formed by the cooling of highly heated molten fluid material known as magma. The word magma is derived from a Greek word meaning ‘dough.’ We do not know the exact depths at which magma forms, but probably it is formed at different depths not exceeding 40 km. Molten rocks produce an increase in volume, which is responsible for causing fractures or cracks in the crust. The overlying pressure gets weakened along these openings, thus forcing out the magma through them. Otherwise, it cannot escape due to great overlying pressure. When magma is ejected to the surface, it is called lava. Igneous rocks are formed from solidified molten magma below or on the earth’s surface. As they comprise the earth’s first crust and all other rocks are derived from them, these are called the parent of all rocks or the ‘primary rocks.’ About 95% of the volume of the outermost 16 km of the earth is composed of them. These are largely hard and massive because of their magmatic origin and are crystalline in appearance.
On the basis of their mode of occurrence, igneous rocks can be classified as extrusive or volcanic rocks and intrusive rocks. Extrusive igneous rocks are formed by the cooling of lava on the earth’s surface. As lava cools very rapidly on coming out of the hot interior of the earth, the mineral crystals forming these rocks are very fine. These rocks are also called volcanic rocks. Gabbro and basalt are very common examples of such rocks. These rocks are found in volcanic areas. Deccan plateau’s regur soil in India is derived from lava. Intrusive igneous rocks are formed when magma solidifies below the earth’s surface. The rate of cooling below the earth’s surface is very slow, which gives rise to the formation of large crystals in the rocks. Deep-seated intrusive rocks are termed plutonic rocks, and shallow-depth intrusive rocks are termed hypabyssal. Granite and dolerite are common examples of intrusive rocks. The huge blocks of coarse granitic rocks are found both in the Himalaya and the Deccan Plateau.
Sedimentary rocks are formed by the successive deposition of sediments. These sediments may be the debris eroded from any previously existing rock, which may be igneous rock, metamorphic rock, or old sedimentary rock. Sedimentary rocks have a layered or stratified structure, so these rocks are also called stratified rocks. The thickness of strata varies from a few millimeters to several meters. Generally, these rocks have some type of fossil between their strata. A fossil is the solid part or an impression of a prehistoric animal or plant embedded in strata of sedimentary rocks. Sedimentary rocks are widely spread on the earth’s surface but to a shallow depth. The individual rock particles are first broken from rocks and then transported by running water, ocean currents, glaciers, or even by wind from one place to another. They may settle in calmer waters of lakes or oceans or at places where the transporting agent no longer has enough energy to carry them farther. These are identified as riverine, lacustrine (formed by lakes), glacial, or aeolian (formed by wind) sedimentary rocks with reference to their deposition near rivers, lakes, glaciers, or deserts, respectively. The sediments are often loose, unconsolidated, soft rock material in the beginning, like sand and clay, but in the course of time, they get hardened to a compact material by excessive pressure and cementation to form sedimentary rocks. Sandstone, shale, limestone, and dolomite are examples of sedimentary rocks.
Metamorphic rocks are formed under the influence of heat or pressure on sedimentary or igneous rocks. Tremendous pressure and high temperature change the color, hardness, structure, and composition of all types of pre-existing rocks. The process which brings about the change is known as metamorphism, and the ultimate products formed due to the operation of such processes are defined as metamorphic rocks. Temperature, pressure stress, and access to chemically reactive substances are the main agents responsible for metamorphism. When molten magma or lava comes in contact with surrounding rocks, it bakes them and changes them into metamorphic rocks. Heat causes the minerals to recrystallize in the rock. The process of change by heat is called thermal or contact metamorphism. Slate, gneiss, schist, marble, and diamond are good examples of metamorphic rocks. Metamorphic rocks are hard and tough in comparison to the parent rocks from which they are formed. Different types of metamorphic rocks are found all over the world. In India, marble is found in Rajasthan, Bihar, and Madhya Pradesh, whereas slates are available in plenty in Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, and Haryana. In Kangra and Kumaun regions of the Himalaya, slates of different colors are found.
Man has been interacting with the surface of the earth for a long time. With time and advancement in technology, he is making different uses of rocks and minerals. The importance of rocks is given below: Soils are derived from rocks. Soils provide suitability for agricultural products that provide food and raw material for many industries. Rocks are the source of types of building material directly or indirectly. Granite, gneiss, sandstone, marble, and slates are extensively used in the construction of buildings. The Taj Mahal is made of white marble. The Red Forts of Delhi and Agra are made of red sandstone. Slates are used for roof purposes in different parts of India. Minerals are the foundation of modern civilization. Metallic minerals provide all metals ranging from very precious gold, platinum, silver, copper to aluminum and iron. These metals are obtained from different rocks. Certain rocks and minerals are used as raw material for many industries. In the cement industry and limestone kilns, different types of rocks and minerals are used for the production of finished goods. Graphite is used in crucible and pencil manufacturing as raw materials. Precious stones and metals are obtained from different metamorphic or igneous rocks. Diamond is a precious stone used in jewelry and is a metamorphic rock. Similarly, other precious stones like gems, rubies, and sapphires are obtained from different types of rocks. Fuels in the form of coal, petroleum, natural gas, and nuclear minerals are derived from different rocks. Fertilizers are also derived from some rocks. Phosphatic fertilizers are obtained from phosphorite, a phosphate mineral found in abundance in some parts of the world. Rocks and minerals are the main source of all metals, precious stones, solid fuel, and raw materials for industries.
Weathering is the general term applied to the combined action of all processes that cause rock to disintegrate physically and decompose chemically. Among these elements, temperature, rainfall, frost, fog, and ice are the important ones. Weathering begins as soon as rocks come in contact with one or more elements of weather on the surface of the earth. In nature, generally, both disintegration and decomposition act together at the same time and assist each other. We must remember that the weathered material (i.e., disintegrated and decomposed) lies in situ (i.e., at its original position). In this process, no transportation or movement of material is involved other than its falling down under the force of gravity. When the rocks are broken up into smaller fragments without any chemical change in their composition, it is called physical weathering. The term mechanical weathering is also used for physical weathering. Physical weathering takes place in different ways in different types of areas.
Chemical weathering involves the process of oxidation, carbonation, hydration, and solution. In chemical weathering, rocks undergo chemical changes through the formation of new compounds or substances. Oxidation is the process in which atmospheric oxygen reacts with the rock to produce oxides. The greatest impact of this process is observed on ferrous minerals. Oxygen present in humid air reacts with iron grains in the rocks to form a yellow or red oxide of iron, which is called rusting. Rust decomposes rocks completely with the passage of time. Carbonation is the process by which various types of carbonates are formed. Some of these carbonates are soluble in water. For example, when rainwater containing carbon dioxide passes through pervious limestone rocks, the rock joints enlarge due to the action of carbonic acid, and lime is removed in solution. Hydration is the process by which water is absorbed by the minerals of the rock. Due to the absorption of water by the rock, its volume increases, and the grains lose their shape. Feldspar, for example, is changed into kaolin through hydration. Kaolin on Vindhyan Hills near Jabalpur has been formed in this manner. Solution is the process in which some of the minerals get dissolved in water and are removed in solution. Rock salt and gypsum are removed by this process.
Biotic weathering is carried out by plants, animals, and man. Plants contribute to both mechanical and chemical weathering. The roots of the plants penetrate into the joints of the rocks, grow longer and thicker, and exert pressure on the rocks, thereby enlarging the rock joints and breaking them into smaller fragments. Burrowing animals like earthworms, rats, rabbits, termites, and ants break down the rocks. These disintegrated rocks can easily be eroded or removed by wind, etc. Hooves of animals break the soil and thus assist soil erosion. The role of earthworms and termites is of special significance. According to scientists, there is a possibility of the occurrence of about 150,000 earthworms in an acre. Human beings play a very important role in the weathering of various rocks. They can convert 10 to 15 tonnes of rock mass into good soil and bring it to the surface. Man breaks a large amount of rocks in the course of his activities like agriculture, construction of houses, roads, etc. He quarries for mining minerals by breaking, weakening, and loosening the rocks, thus helping in weathering.
The process of gradation involves the leveling and smoothening of the land surface. It includes both degradation and aggradation. Degradation is the weathering of the land surface by erosion, and aggradation is the raising or filling up of depressions by deposition. Exogenetic forces are constantly working to bring about leveling or the gradation of land. They attempt to achieve a condition of balance between erosion and deposition, which means a graded position. Agents of gradation like rivers, glaciers, winds, sea waves, and underground water perform their task with the help of the triple action of weathering, erosion, and deposition. The leveling down of elevated portions of the earth’s surface is done by erosion. The filling up of depressions is done by the deposition of the eroded material transported by the external agents of gradation. The work of gradation has two components: degradation and aggradation. Degradation includes the work of weathering, that is, the movement of scraped and scratched material aided by the great force of gravity. It also includes the work of erosion, implying the transportation of the rock material by an agent of gradation. The increase in the movement of rock debris increases both its erosional and transportational capacities. Aggradation is the filling up of low-lying areas of depression by eroded material. Deposition starts when the agents of gradation lose their force or have obstruction in their way. As a result, eroded material is deposited in depressions, which not only creates new landforms but also modifies the existing ones. The process of gradation is not performed by a single agent but is rather a result of the work of all agents of gradation acting simultaneously.
Soil is the uppermost layer of the land surface that plants use and depend on for nutrients, water, and physical support. Five factors control the formation of soil: parent rock, relief, time, climate, and plant and animal organisms. The former three are called passive factors, while the latter two are active factors. The parent material and climate are the most important because these two affect the other factors. A soil is derived from the underlying rock or the parent rock material containing different minerals. The parent rock gets broken into tiny pieces and is decomposed slowly by physical and chemical weathering. It furnishes inorganic mineral particles of the soil. The parent rock also influences the rate of soil formation, the chemical composition, color, texture, structure, mineral content, and fertility. Topography of an area affects the degree of erosion of the parent rock material and the rate of surface runoff of water. Steep slopes are subjected to more rapid runoff of surface water than gentle slopes. Therefore, there is less infiltration of water on steeper slopes, which retards soil-forming processes. In addition, rapid runoff on steep slopes often erodes their surface faster than soil can develop. It is because of this that mountainous topography develops coarse, thin, and infertile soil, while plain areas have rich, well-developed fertile soils. The soil-forming process is very slow. A well-developed soil results as an end product of physical, chemical, and biological processes operating collectively for a very long period of time. Time is by far the most important factor in this sense, as over a long period, it not only tends to reduce the difference caused by the parent material but also influences biological activities within the soil. Due to this factor, two different parent materials may develop the same type of soil in one type of climatic region. For example, granite and sandstone have developed into sandy soil in the dry Rajasthan desert. On the other hand, two different types of soils may develop from the same parent material in two climatic regions. For example, the crystalline granites have developed laterite soils in monsoon regions and non-laterite soils in sub-humid regions.
The process of weathering, its effectiveness, and the type of plant and animal organisms in a region are directly linked with the seasonal change of temperature and the distribution and nature of precipitation. Hence, climate plays an important role in soil-forming processes. Plants and animals play an active role in transforming parent materials into mature soil. Dead plants and animals contribute to the organic content of the soil. The process of decay, aided by bacterial action, transforms organic matter into humus. Humus is responsible for the fertility of the soil and also enhances the water retention capacity of the soil. This organic material helps the soil to support plant life. The plant cover, in turn, protects the rich upper layer of the soil from erosion by increasing the proportion of rainfall entering into the soil rather than running off the surface. It also prevents greater evaporation of soil moisture by its thick canopy, thus allowing the soil to mature and become fertile.
Soil erosion is the removal of surface material, usually soil, by the action of running water, wind, or other geological agents. The processes create numerous tiny channels (rills) a few centimeters in depth. The removal of soil material naturally or by human action is called soil erosion. Soil erosion is of four types: wind erosion, sheet erosion, rill erosion, and gully erosion. Factors influencing soil erosion are velocity and amount of surface runoff, nature of slope, texture and structure of soils, and frequency and speed of winds. Soil conservation methods include protection of forests, afforestation, bunding, reclamation of lands, controlling floods, overgrazing, terracing, strip farming, contour ploughing, and crop rotation.
Earth is a spherical body. The direct observations into its interior are limited to a depth of a few kilometers. Temperature, pressure, and density increase from the earth’s surface to its center. Earth’s interior is divided into three concentric layers: crust, mantle, and core. The material of the crust is composed of rocks. Rock is composed of one or more minerals. Minerals have a definite chemical composition. On the basis of their mode of formation, rocks are classified into three types: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic. Igneous rocks are formed by the solidification of molten lava or magma. Granite, basalt, and gabbro are examples of igneous rocks. Molten material solidified beneath the earth’s surface forms intrusive rocks, and above the earth’s surface, it forms extrusive igneous rocks. Rocks are of immense use to us. They provide precious metals and stones, building material, fuel, etc. Soil erosion is a natural process of destruction and removal of soil material from its place. Running water, winds, sea waves, and glaciers are the most active agents of erosion. Erosion of soils takes place in four ways: wind erosion, sheet erosion, rill erosion, and gully erosion. Removal of soil cover depends on the velocity and speed of water, nature of slope, texture and structure of soils, frequency of dust storms, and nature of precipitation. Man, through his misdeeds, has also helped natural forces in increasing the problem of soil erosion. Methods to prevent soils from being eroded constitute soil conservation. These methods are protection of forests, afforestation, contour ploughing, terrace and strip farming, bunding, flood control, etc.