In the previous lesson, we learnt that the interior of the earth is very hot. Earthquakes and volcanoes are concentrated along a few narrow belts. The type and density of rocks of the crust are variable, and the surface features are dynamic in character. This dynamism is due to two forces - endogenetic and exogenetic. Endogenetic forces are those which originate from below the surface. Due to this, an area may get elevated or submerged. These forces try to make the surface irregular. Exogenetic forces operate from above the surface and try to eliminate the irregularities through the process of denudation.
The term "Isostasy" is derived from the Greek word "Isostasia" meaning the state of being in balance. There are great differences in height among various surface features like mountains, plateaus, plains and oceanic trenches, yet the earth maintains perfect balance while rotating. This state of dynamic equilibrium is called isostatic equilibrium. Airy, a geologist, proposed that all crustal columns have uniform density but varying thickness - taller features like mountains have deeper "roots" in the denser sima layer below, similar to how taller wooden blocks immerse deeper in water. Pratt suggested that crustal blocks have varying density - taller features are less dense while shorter ones are denser, all compensating at a certain depth, like metal bars of different densities floating to the same level in mercury.
The continental drift theory proposed by Alfred Wegener suggested that all continents were united as a supercontinent called Pangea about 280 million years ago, surrounded by Panthalassa ocean. Pangea later split into Laurasia (northern part) and Gondwanaland (southern part) separated by Tethys sea, which eventually drifted to their present positions. Evidence includes: jigsaw fit of continental margins (like South America and Africa); matching mountain ranges across continents; similar fossils and coal deposits in now-separated lands; and paleomagnetism showing shifting pole positions. Later, plate tectonics theory provided the mechanism for drift through convection currents in the mantle.
The lithosphere (crust + upper solid mantle) is broken into several plates moving over the plastic asthenosphere. There are seven major plates (Eurasian, Pacific, African etc.) and about 20 minor ones. Convection currents caused by radioactive heating in the mantle drive plate movements. Plates interact at three types of boundaries: divergent (moving apart, creating new crust at mid-ocean ridges); convergent (colliding, forming mountains or subducting into trenches); and transform (sliding past each other). These boundaries are associated with earthquakes, volcanoes and major landforms. The distribution of seismic and volcanic activity clearly follows plate boundaries.